Salutations celestial sight seers!
I'm David Fuller, welcome to Eyes on the Sky;
what's up this week?
On December 12-st at 17:11 Universal Time,
the winter solstice occurs for the Northern
Hemisphere.
So what can we expect to see in the sky for
the coming season?
In the north around 9 pm, the circumpolar
stars for many of us well north of the equator
rotate 90 degrees or so from December to March.
Cassiopeia begins the season high to the northwest,
with the easily-seen Big Dipper or Plough
low to the north east.
Directly north, Kocab hangs directly below
Polaris, with the seemingly blank Camelopardalis
and Lynx sections of the sky above the north
star.
Fast forwarding three months, Cassiopeia drops,
Ursa Major rises, and Kocab is now towards
the east.
This is direct evidence of our planet having
revolved 90 degrees over those three months,
with its axis still pointing the same direction.
To the west, many autumn favorites are visible
early, such as Pegasus and Andromeda -- so
look for the sights within their borders in
early winter.
As the season progresses, many of the dimmer
water constellations like Pisces, Cetus and
Eridanus replace them, but a fair number of
the prominent winter constellations aren't
far behind.
We'll look at constellations to the south
next.
Dark Sky Fact: Giving any gifts this holiday
season?
Why not get some silver crown bulbs for post
lamps, or some shields for floodlights?
Many of us buy ourselves a gift or two, so
consider giving yourself -- and others - the
gift of slightly darker skies, along with
being an example for friends, family and neighbors.
Orion, perhaps the most easily recognized
pattern in the sky, graces the southeast.
Orange-appearing Betelgeuse is the bright
star at the hunter's shoulder on the left,
and blue-white Rigel is at his knee to our
right.
The nearly straight and similarly bright belt
stars help us locate several winter constellations
nearby to Orion.
Up and to the right of the belt is Aldebaran,
the red-giant symbolizing the eye of Taurus.
The Bull appears to protect the Seven Sisters
of the Pleiades from the hunter, although
this does not entirely follow the mythology
of these characters.
Down and to the left of the belt is the brightest
night-time star in the sky, Sirius, punctuating
the hunter's dog Canis Major.
25 degrees up from Sirius and away from Orion
is first magnitude Procyon, one of two stars
that mark the unremarkable Canis Minor.
But swinging up and over Orion from there
is Gemini, the twins.
Normally we would be excited about the similarities
and differences of Castor and Pollux, but
a brighter visitor graces the twins all season
long: Jupiter slides it's way through here
during winter.
As if rounding out a circle, 4-th brightest
northern hemisphere star Capella helps us
find Auriga.
This constellation appears to share a star
with Taurus, with Alnath often forming not
only a horn of the bull, but completing the
shape of Auriga -- though the reality is the
star is Beta Tauri, so Auriga technically
loses out there.
All of these stars move quickly across the
sky in winter, so look for objects within
them as the cross or are near the meridian,
and they will arrive there earlier in the
evening as the season grows later.
Towards the east, the stars of spring are
making their way up from the horizon, the
ones of most interest to us being Cancer,
Leo, Canes Venatici and Coma Berenices.
Along The Ecliptic: On Tuesday, the Moon is
both full, but also a few days before apogee,
giving us the smallest full Moon of 2013,
or mini-Moon.
In the evening, Venus goes on an extreme diet,
slimming down from 17% to 11% illumination,
yet growing in angular diameter from 48 arc
seconds to 53 arc seconds; use a small telescope
to see that change.
An hour before sunrise, Spica splits the distance
between Saturn closer to the horizon, and
Mars further west along the ecliptic.
And for outer gas giant stargazers, Uranus
crosses the border of Cetus into Pisces near
the 5-th magnitude star 44 Piscium.
Neptune sets earlier in the evening three
and a half degrees from Theta Aquarii.
That's all for this week.
Keep your eyes on the sky and your outdoor
lights aimed down, so we can all see, what's
up.
I'm David Fuller, wishing you clear and dark
skies.